Okay, so we're gonna get into an
introduction of Docker. We're going to assume
that you really don't know what Docker
is. But I think it's a really exciting
technology because it is truly a game
changer in your development as a Java
developer. It opens up a lot of
capabilities that you can do, because it
makes things so easy. So if you have MySQL database, you can spool it up just
like that in a Docker Container. It's all
self-contained. So in doing
Java development and Spring Development,
if you need MySQL, MongoDB, message broker
like RabbitMQ, it's easy to bring up a
Docker Container with one of those
already pre-loaded. We can do what we
need to do as software developers
without a contaminating environment. Now
Docker is not equal to VM. So, now the
question might be coming back to your
mind. So, what is Docker? So, let me get into that.
I've got a nice little PowerPoint
presentation here, that I'm gonna show
you, and answer the question, what is
Docker? Okay, so what is Docker? So we're
gonna get into an introduction of Docker
in this slideshow. So what it is, it's
a standard for Linux containers. Now a
container is an isolated runtime inside
of Linux. It also provides a private
machine like space under Linux, and these
containers will run under any modern
Linux Kernel. It's important to point
out, that this is very much Linux
centric, but it's also nothing new.
So containers have been around for quite
some time, even under the old UNIX days.
Now, in these containers, when you're
inside them, they do have their own
process space, their own network interface.
Generally speaking, processes will run as
root inside of a container. If you're
familiar with Linux security, root is the
most powerful user and pretty common not to allow
things to run as root. I did say this
is generally speaking, there are
exceptions to that. They also have their
own disk space. They can share that
container, can share disk with the host
that it's running on as well. So this is
all very important to you guys conceptually,
when your program is running inside the
container, it feels to the program like
it's running on its own private machine.
But, that is not really the case. It's
easy to think of the container, as a
virtual machine, but it's not. This is
an image I took directly from Docker.
This is actually in the docker
information up on the web, unless
they've changed it since they published
this course. But on the left hand side,
of virtual machines. Now you can see
that we have some type of infrastructure
being a physical hardware and on top of
that hardware, it's going to be the
operating system, and in this case, a Host
Operating System, and then a Hypervisor
to manage virtual machines. Now each
virtual machine is going to have its own
guest operating system, with its own
binaries and libraries, and then its own
application. Now the important thing to
remember, as a virtual machine, is just
that it is a virtual piece of hardware.
So we're mocking out a PC or a server,
some type of typically X86 architecture.
So the hypervisor
is making it seem to the runtime
environment, that is running on physical
hardware, that's why they call it
a virtual machine. It's a machine
that's written in software, so to speak.
You can see on the left hand side,
there's a lot of overhead with that now.
Now it's important, about on the right hand
side of the containers, there is no
guest operating system. The guest
operating system doesn't exist, so you're
running off the operating system of the
host machine so you still have... down at
the bottom, you still have the
infrastructure, which is being
the physical computer, the laptop, the
server, the desktop... whatever it's running
out. And then, your operating system and
that can be a couple of different things
primarily UNIX based or Linux based.
Now, OS X has taken to it quite nicely because under the covers of Apple's OS X
operating system is a flavor of Unix,
that Apple adapted. So the Docker stuff
does point quite nicely there. And on
Windows 10, there is a native port to
allow that. Now other operating systems
will require you to run VirtualBox, which
will bring up a Linux virtual machine
for to run the Docker Containers inside
them. So in this case, you'll be if you're
running an older version of Windows, pre-10,
you will need to bring up a virtual
machine running in Linux and within that,
you'll be able to run Docker. Now also,
comparing to this, we have the Docker
Image, which is actually fairly
lightweight, and then each side of the
container has its own binaries and
libraries, and then its own application
and their firewall, off in their own
container. Now the key point of
remembering this picture is that a
container is not equal to VM. You can
see in this image here, the guest
operating system for the first machine
does take up a lot of resources. So if
you're running three different virtual
machines, on one physical machine, it's
gonna get quite costly, because you have
to share or share the limited resources
of the infrastructure or the physical
machine, that you're running out amongst
all the virtual machines. Whereas, if you
compare on the right hand side of Docker,
this is much more efficient. It really
depends on what you're running and your
workload, but some estimates are 30% - 40%
more efficient in terms of your system
utilization. So it's actually, a fairly
significant difference in how much you
can utilize it. Utilize the hardware.
Okay, let's get into some common Docker
terminology, a Docker Image.
Now, this is a representation of a Docker
Container. It's kind of in a Java world,
it's kind of like a war or a jar file so
very similar. And then, the Docker
Container is like the standard runtime.
I like to think of this roughly equating
it out to the Java world of running an
executable jar, so it's self-contained
that's running inside the JVM. Now, the
Docker Engine. This is basically what
manages all the docker stuff. So you get
the docker engine commands, and it's
going to create and allocate Docker
Container, so startup those containers,
bring them up, and shut them down. It will
allow them access to some different
system resources, such as directories on
the host operating system, or network
resources. This is an image from
Docker themselves, talking about the
challenge, and why this is important.
We think about deploying out into the
enterprise today. You have a lot of
different requirements, so, you have like,
Python and Postgres and Ruby and Rails
and each at the top those are all
different deployments and different
things. And then, we have the operations
requirements of dealing with QA and data
centers and production servers or
development servers are developing on
your own machine. DR, disaster recovery is
a very important issue. You also have
access for like contractors and
regulatory compliance, especially if
you're doing something like PCI or if
your publicly traded in the US, you'd
have SAS 70 to contend with. So to
all the access controls.
Today's enterprise environments are
very very challenging. They have a
lot of requirements. There's really no
standard to it. Docker, kind of, gets
its nickname from, if you look at how
Cargo transport used to be done, it was
all haphazard. So, you had to literally
carry cars across or individual barrels
of wine or
pianos. It was all independent, so
that there was no standards for it.
It was very difficult, not
having that. If you look at shipping
today, where you have the container, it
really becomes a no-brainer, because
these containers are intermodal. They
can be moved on trucks or on boats, and
moved all over the world. They can be
used to transport, just about any type of
goods, that are being traded and shipping,
and that's really kind of concept of the
Docker Container. Because if you look at
the Docker Container, now you have a
standard entity. We come from being
Java developers and our standard entity
is either a jar or a war file or if
you're really slugging it through with
J2E or JEE... in your file, I hope no you
guys are doing that still. But, that is
only applicable to the Java world and it
doesn't address like databases or Ruby
or Rails applications, and things like
that. So the technology world is much
larger than the Java footprint that we
are comfortable with. Now, this has been a
real game-changer for companies
utilizing Docker because it's highly effective for them to use. Companies like Google, that are
literally deploying in tens of thousands
of Docker Containers every day, and it's
really becoming quite explosive in the
growth. Now we can see back in 2013,
not much going on in the Docker world.
Then it slowly started getting
picked up. We can see that it's just
exponential growth goes from less than a
million downloads to over six billion
containers being downloaded from docker
hub. This is just containers, or I
should say, images being brought down
from Docker. So you can see that it's
become rapidly evolving, and the
size here is still a little dated. So, we
are working, I am working with Docker 1.15
so this slide is against 1.12.
Things are moving steadily along and
there's a lot of innovation coming out
in the Docker community. Now, the
last thing I wanna talk about is the
Docker Runtime Engine. This takes a
little bit for you to get your head
around. So when you're running Docker,
you're gonna have on the server at
Docker Daemon and it's not demon. It's not
possessed. There's no evil exorcism way
after as. Daemon, so that means it's a
background process.  In this process is
gonna run with root privileges on
your machine and this is what's gonna
control all the Docker Containers. Now, it
is exposed by REST API. You'll see
this more when you're setting it up on a
Linux distribution. In the course, I'm
using OS X where it is,
there's the Native Client and it does
make it pretty darn easy. But if you have
to install it raw, you may have to
remember to set the Docker Host import
that the Daemon is listening up. So that's kind of important stuff.
Because it is a REST API and listening out port, it allows you to have your Docker client, which is what you use your commands to talk
to other machines running Docker. In it,
as you get your head more around Docker,
this becomes more and more important
because having that capability allows
you to allocate and work with containers
on other machines that are running a
Docker Daemon. So you can bring up
clusters machines and cluster together
containers to build out an application.
So this is a kind of a really important
concept. Okay so now you have a better
idea of what Docker is from the slides
that I have. Now I did steal some of
these images from Docker, especially the
one on the growth projections, that
Docker has been going through. If you're
paying attention you can see some of
those dates are a little dated I assure
you, that the growth of Docker has
not slowed down at all. It's continued
see explosive growth. I'm seeing it more
and more in the workplace. Enterprise's
are adapting it. I guarantee you, if
you are not using Docker right now, or
not already been exposed to, if you don't
know somebody using it, chances are
you're going to be using it. I'm seeing
this roll across the information
technology space, much like virtual machine is dead.
Because I did see the virtual machines
come through, I remember we had these
big massive servers, and we started cutting down its virtual machine.  There wasn't a  lot of trust in the marketplace initially, and then more and more virtual
machines to start becoming used. If
you talk to anybody who's running a data center now,
they couldn't imagine running operations
without virtual machines. It's just not
done anymore. Unless you're like Google
or Facebook, running all this commodity
hardware. A lot of enterprises are
taking these very powerful servers,
putting multiple virtual machines on
them, to run their applications. That's a
very common use case. Docker is really
the next wave in that. Actually like
Google, they run tens of thousands of
Docker Containers every day. So that is
their go-to. Now next in this course,
we are gonna go ahead and get Docker
installed on your machine, so we can
actually do a Hello World or dot hello
world equivalent in Docker.
So the next module is gonna start
stepping us through that.